Today we're going to
be looking at Java SE6.
If you were in the last session,
you heard about Mustang.
Mustang and Java SE6
are one and the same.
We're going to be
talking about what's new,
the 64-bit JVM, and performance.
We're from the Java Virtual Machine team.
Normally we're down very deep, down,
down, below your application.
You don't hear much from
us unless things go wrong.
But every 12 months or so,
we crawl out of our holes and tell you
what's new in the virtual machine world.
So today, I'd like to...
fill you in enough so that you can
answer the following questions.
So, Java SE 6, what is it?
What's new?
And how is Apple enhancing
the Java SE experience?
Like you to know what the
Java 64-bit virtual machine is,
and I'd like you to know what some of the
tools are that you can use to understand
what your Java application is doing,
and I'd like you to know and be
able to answer just how does--.
[Transcript missing]
the Java C compiler,
but it's been hard and it's not been
standardized so that you can be assured
that it's going to work through releases.
And now through the
efforts of the standards,
the JSR group 199,
and by the way if you want more
information on these particular items,
search for JSR 199 on the web,
there's an API that allows
you to use a compiler.
And here's some code fragments that will
give you a flavor of what it's like.
So on the top line here,
I can ask the runtime environment
for the system Java compiler and it
returns a compiler object and I can
take that compiler object and build
up tasks which are like compile
this file and compile that file.
And then if I take the task
and say get result on it,
it will actually do the
compilation and return the-- Yeah.
--compiled result which I can then load
through a class loader and then execute,
call things through reflection.
Now this gives you a
flavor of what it's like.
It's still complicated.
A Hello World example where you
take a simple Hello World program
as a Java's text string,
compile it and execute it,
it's about two pages of code.
But it's a whole lot
easier than it used to be.
It's complicated because
you have to set up.
You have to set up kind of file
system objects to represent
your text string as a file.
You also have to set up paths so
that you can get back from the
compiler the stream of any error
messages or warning messages.
But in the end,
you get the ability to take
Java text inside your code and
turn it into Java programs,
Java methods that you can execute.
And so the way this will change.
The way this will change programming
is that you can actually use Java as
kind of a scripting language and take
expressions or other program fragments,
combine them with a context and
compile them and execute them.
Pretty powerful.
[Transcript missing]
People started using annotations for,
well, there were the standard things
that had been kind of there before,
like deprecation and Java doc comments.
But using the Java 5 APT processor
for annotations turned out to be more
difficult than anybody anticipated.
So with Java 6,
there's a pluggable annotation processing
API where you can write plug-ins that
don't have to do all of the work of,
you know,
searching through the entire program.
You can actually just write plug-ins
for the particular annotations
that you're interested in.
And you also have access to
what the parse tree looks like.
Pretty powerful stuff as well.
Scripting languages.
There's a new scripting
language access API.
And just looking on the internet,
I found references to almost every
scripting language under the sun,
including AppleScript,
that people are working on using
this API to plug into Java.
So that when we get some experience
with scripting languages,
you'll have much easier access
to JavaScript and a zillion
other scripting languages.
And lastly, I want to talk about
pre-verified class files.
This doesn't change the language
so much in terms of how you use it,
but it does have some interesting
things that you should know about.
Let me go into detail.
What split class file verification is,
is that in Java 5 and before,
when you load a class
into the virtual machine,
it has to verify the bytecodes to make
sure that you're not doing something
that's either unsafe or malicious
that would harm the virtual machine,
or give you access to things your
program isn't supposed to have access to.
And there's a cost involved in
executing that verification.
In order to make loading of classes
and execution startup time faster,
what Java 6 has is it's split between a
compile time phase and a runtime phase.
At compile time, the Java C compiler in
Java 6 now compiles.
It compiles stack map attributes that
tell in the bytecodes at given points
what can be on the stack at any given
point in terms of what type of objects.
And the reason why this allows
us to increase speed and still
maintain security is that these stack
maps are kind of hard to compute,
but we can quickly
verify them at runtime.
So improved startup time,
Sun is claiming 50%
faster verification time.
We haven't timed it ourselves.
The downside of this is that
Java 6 has a new class file format.
So if you're distributing class
files that are going to run
on earlier virtual machines,
you need to use the dash target options
to create class files that will run
on those earlier virtual machines,
and they won't have the split
class file verification.
Okay, library support.
A few new features that come from
down deep in the virtual machine.
Something that people have been
asking for for ages is now here,
the ability to find out how much
free disk space is on the machine.
There's some faster zip and
jar file access routines,
which speed up things all
over a network file system.
So if you're remote
executing over the network,
you'll notice some
speed differences there.
There are a bunch of
new concurrent classes.
So if you're doing multi-threaded
programming and you've been
using the concurrent classes,
well, if you haven't been using
the concurrent classes,
you should definitely check them out.
But there are some new concurrent
queues and several other classes,
such as concurrent skip lists,
if you're indexing data by key.
Okay.
Okay, attach on demand.
What is it?
Well, let me take you back to Java 5 and
talk about what we didn't have there.
In Java 5,
you saw a bunch of new monitoring tools,
but you had to start up your
program with a special flag in order
to turn on the monitoring tool.
Now, for a server application,
such as something that's
been running in production,
you didn't turn those on because
there was a cost penalty.
And by the time you realized that
there was something going on,
it had been running for a day,
and there was no way to figure out how it
was going on because you forgot the flag.
And you wouldn't have put it on
in the first place because it's
a production environment and
it was costing you performance.
So in Java 6,
we introduce attach on demand.
And this is a new protocol.
This is a new protocol inside of
the virtual machine that allows a
tool to talk to the virtual machine.
And it doesn't cost you
anything until you use it.
And when you do use it,
the tool will send a signal
to the virtual machine,
interrupt it for a moment,
and then send it one of several
commands that it knows about in order
to execute and fire up the tool.
So it supports the Java lang
instrument and JVMTI tool interface.
And several other of these tools that
can now talk to the virtual machine.
And as I said before,
great for a server environment because
you can run in production mode,
yet when something seems weird,
you can check it out.
So let's go ahead and check it out.
something that people have been
asking for for a long time,
they install an experimental
version of the virtual machine,
and they go to the command
line and they type Java,
and they get the standard official
version that's installed on Mac OS,
and they want to be able to test
it out from the command line.
Well, we now allow you to change
the command line execution
via the Java preferences pane.
So this is the Java preferences
tool in Java 6.
It looks pretty much like the Java 5 one,
but if you change the setting
at the top of the list of the...
So, the JVM version that's
specified for applications,
it also changes it on the command line.
Note that applications in their
plist encoding can specify
which versions of Java that they
need and must have to execute,
and so they pick the first
acceptable version on this list,
but the command line will
always pick the top list.
So, here I've set it to Java 6.
So with my command line
now set to run Java 6,
I want to give you some examples of
some new features that you can use for
monitoring and measuring under Java 6.
The jhat command is a
new heap analysis tool,
and I'll give you an example of that.
The JMAP command, which was in Java 5,
has some new options.
Finalizer Info tells you things
going on in finalization.
And the dump option works
with the Jhat command.
We'll talk about that.
I'll show you an example.
JConsole is new and improved.
I'll run through some examples there.
JInfo, and I'll show you that.
And DTrace, later on in the talk,
one of my colleagues will tell you
about how DTrace support works in
Java in the Hotspot virtual machine.
JConsole is new and improved.
I'll run through some examples there.
JInfo, and I'll show you that.
And DTrace, later on in the talk,
one of my colleagues will tell you
about how DTrace support works in
Java in the Hotspot virtual machine.
For now, we're limited to examining
processes on the same machine.
We do not have the Solaris-only
right now capability to examine
processes on another machine.
So, JInfo is a tool that you
give it a process ID.
We'll tell you all of the properties of
the Java process that it is running with.
So, for example,
if you're not finding a class
in a running application and
you want to figure out...
Excuse me.
You want to figure out which class
path you executed the command with?
Well, you can do that by simply
examining the process with JINFO.
It will also tell you, for example,
which garbage collector flags and other
VM flags you ran the application with.
JMAP is a tool that tells you
what's going on in the virtual
memory system of the garbage
collected heap inside of Java.
JSTACK is a command that will tell
you what stack trace for each threads
For each thread,
what is the stack trace of
the running application?
So it just takes a snapshot
of what it's doing.
So if it's not making any progress,
you can figure out what the threads
are and what state they're in.
JSTAT is kind of a catch-all
command that has a lot of options.
If you use dash options,
you'll get a list of them.
Here's the list for Mac OS X.
And I've given you two examples,
one of looking at the classes
that have been loaded in the
application that's running,
as well as what the compiler is compiling
and how many things it's compiled so far,
the just-in-time compiler.
Now, JMAP-Dump is new in Java 6,
and it will take an existing running
Java application and make a snapshot
of the heap of that process.
So here I've directed...
Here I've directed the JMAP command
to dump this information into
a file called java2d.bin,
since I'm examining the Java 2D demo.
So it creates this file,
and then I use the new JHAT application,
monitoring application,
and it creates a web server that
shows the heap analysis of the
information that's in this dump.
So if I type the JHAT command and
give it this file that I just created,
it tells me that it's
reading a bunch of stuff,
and then at the bottom it says,
started HTTP server on port 7000.
So now I go over to Safari and
load up localhost 7000,
and lo and behold, here's a web page that
describes every package that's
being used in the application,
and inside each package,
all of the classes.
And if I click on each of these classes,
it'll tell me information about that.
And what I want to focus on
is at the bottom of this page,
you'll see it says other queries,
and one of those queries
is the peep histogram.
So I'm going to go over to Safari,
and I'm going to load up localhost 7000,
and lo and behold, here's a web page that
describes every package that's
being used in the application.
One important thing you can do here,
if you're trying to figure out
where all your memory is going,
is to click on this,
and it gives you an ordered list by
the total amount of storage used of
objects of each class in your system,
in your running application.
So if I see something high up
on the list that's way more
objects than I'm expecting,
chances are I have a leak in my system,
and I'm hanging on to a bunch of
objects that I really shouldn't be.
JConsole is new and improved in Java 6.
It was in Java 5,
but now it's an official
tool that's part of Java 6,
and it has some additional capabilities.
So let's focus in on this.
When I started it,
it gives me a list of what
JPS would have given me,
a list of the running Java processes.
So let's click on the java2d.jar,
and it gives me this interactive
display showing me memory usage,
threads, CPU runtime,
a bunch of information.
And I can click on the bar on the top and
get more detailed information further.
For example, here are threads.
It shows me the high watermark
of the maximum number of
threads I've executed so far.
And it also gives me down on the bottom
part a list of all of those threads.
And if I click on a given one,
it will give me specific information
about what that thread is doing.
So it's a very powerful interactive
tool for understanding where your
Java application may be using
more resources than necessary,
or where it's getting lost,
or any number of issues that you
may encounter when you're trying
to make your application run as
most efficiently as possible.
A note about crash reporter logs.
All through the past,
we've had two separate logs when
Java goes wrong and crashes.
There's been a crash reporter
log and a native crash log,
and we always have this little
dialogue when people submit bugs.
If they don't submit both of the logs,
then we have to go back and
ask them for the other one.
Well, in Leopard, we've fixed this,
and we've managed to get all of the
information in the crash reporter log.
But if you're submitting
bugs for Tiger and before,
be sure to include both of those logs,
as always.
And importantly,
we want to make this Java 6 release as
stable as our Java 5 release and better.
So when you do encounter problems
in our developer previews or on the
seed that's on the Leopard disk,
send them to us, bugreporter.apple.com.
So let me introduce Victor Hernandez.
He's going to tell you about
the 64-bit virtual machine.
I'm Victor Hernandez.
I also work on the Java VM for Mac OS X.
The last couple years,
we've heard a lot of feedback
about how a lot of you customers
want a 64-bit JVM for Mac OS X.
Well, sure enough, this year,
we actually have the hardware and
the software support available
for you to be able to run your
application in a 64-bit Java VM.
So, what do you need to know about that,
the 64-bit Java VM?
Well, if you've been to the other
64-bit sessions here at WWDC,
you found out that 64-bit environment
means that pointers are now 64-bit.
The native size of the pointer has
increased from 32-bit to 64-bit.
Okay, so what does that mean for Java?
Well,
what it means for your application is...
[Transcript missing]
Just like a year ago,
you didn't have to do much to
move from PowerPC to Intel,
now you don't have to do much
to move from 32-bit to 64-bit.
In fact,
transitioning your Java application to
a 64-bit JVM is completely transparent.
So if it's so easy,
why should you actually care?
Well, there's one issue that
you need to know about,
and it's a really big positive
for some applications.
And that is the fact that
now your application can
run with a larger Java heap.
Before in Mac OS X, in the 32-bit world,
the maximum Java heap
size was 2 gigabytes.
Some of you might actually remember some
of the earliest releases of Mac OS X,
that actually this limit
was actually even lower.
I can't remember what
the exact number was,
but we actually did some futzing around
defragmenting virtual memory to actually
get that number to be around 2 gigabytes.
Well, to incorporate... Increase that
even more would create some
problems in virtual memory,
and we could never get anything
more than 4 gigabytes anyways.
Well now, with the 64-bit JVM,
you're way beyond that 2-gigabyte limit.
In fact, it's a huge number.
I'm not even going to mention the number,
because the real thing you need to
know about is that you can use as much
memory as... You can use a Java heap
the size as large as the physical
memory you have on your system.
I'll be mentioning it in a little while.
Why you should be doing that.
You probably don't want to be using
a Java heap any larger than that.
But it's very cool.
So what does this mean
for your application?
Well, let's talk about what kind
of applications could benefit
from a larger Java heap.
I think it falls into four different
categories of applications.
And all of these applications have
in common that either they're using
a lot of data coming off of disk,
or they're creating a lot of
data during the execution of
the application themselves.
So let's go through some of these.
How about something that processes a
large amount of data coming from disk?
Applications like gene
sequencing do that sort of thing.
Another good example is an enterprise
application that's reading a lot,
that's querying the database constantly.
What about the situation where
suddenly that application was able
to cache the full database in memory,
no longer having to add that query
time to the latency of a transaction?
The iTunes music store, for example.
The iTunes music store, for example,
could definitely fit.
Imagine if they had all their songs,
all of the album art,
all of that cached in memory,
and then basically it's
just that much faster.
That's a really,
really powerful situation to be in.
Another example are scientific
applications that do
algorithmic computations of
visualizations or simulation.
Things like NASA and NOAA are doing.
This is a good example where
you might actually be starting
off with a small amount of data,
chugging through that data in such a
way that you generate a lot more data,
and then actually extract from
them some sort of results,
then you write to disk.
The last one actually is a set
of applications that I haven't
actually seen written very much,
especially not in Java,
where you're taking a large image data,
a large image, and processing it and then
writing it back to disk.
I'm really looking forward
to seeing those sorts of
applications written for the Mac,
maybe even in Java using 64-bit JVM.
So these are the hypothetical lists.
I actually want to get really excited
about running real-world applications on
the JVMs that we develop here at Apple.
And so I went fishing
around the Internet.
The application that we found that was
really cool to use was GeneSpring GX.
It's from Agilent Technologies.
And all I know about it is
it does gene sequencing.
How many people here know
what gene sequencing is?
All right.
So this is a really cool application.
It's a really cool application.
It's a very, really cool application.
It's really, really cool.
It's very, very cool.
It's a really, really cool application.
I did not have access to it.
It's not even amongst the people
holding up their hand at all.
This application is a
complete black box to me.
All I really know about it and
all I really care about that's
really cool is that it uses -- it
generates a whole bunch of data.
It's a complete black box.
And I was like, "Oh, my gosh.
It's a complete black box."
So we loaded some data.
We loaded some data.
We ran an experiment.
And immediately,
it popped up this dialogue that said,
"Oh, sorry.
There's not enough memory." In fact,
this experiment takes
almost six gigs to run.
Well, clearly, in a 32-bit world,
that's not possible.
And I was like, "Sweet.
We have a 64-bit Java VM.
Let's try that." And sure enough,
under our current Leopard Seed support,
we were able to run this application.
The experiment runs fine.
The graphics looks great.
Basically, the app just runs.
And we expect that to be the case for
your application running under Leopard.
Okay, so now you need to be asking
yourself a few questions.
I have described some of the
nature of applications that
could be using larger heap sizes,
but does that apply to your application?
Well, the first question you need
to ask yourself if you need
to move to a 64-bit JVM is,
have you been encountering out-of-memory
errors with your application?
If you are, you probably, you know,
you wouldn't be hitting them if
you're using larger heap size.
But keep in mind that
there is another reason,
other than algorithmic complexity,
as to why your application
is hitting out-of-memory.
It's obvious,
but I still need to point it out.
If you have a Java leak,
a Java memory leak in the 32-bit world,
you're still going to have it in 64-bits,
and it's just going to take
longer for you to find it.
So fix it before you
actually move to 64-bits.
There's another reason.
So let's say your application
doesn't hit an out-of-memory error.
Why would you go to 64-bits?
Well, what about the case where if you
actually were to use more memory,
you would actually be able to
re-architect your application so
it would actually scale better?
A good example is something
where you've split up tasks a
bunch of different processes,
and now you can think about moving
all those processes into one process,
farm them out to multiple threads,
and just use a larger Java heap.
That application will definitely
be scaling a lot better.
But I do want to make the point
that you should be approaching
all of this conversion from 32-bit
to 64-bit with not switching to
64-bit just for the hell of it,
but actually convincing
yourself that it's actually
needed for your application.
The default should be, you know,
stick to what works for
your application best.
And the reason that you shouldn't
just move to 64-bit is because there's
three things that you really need
to consider that will actually change
once you go from 32-bit to 64-bit.
Three things you need
to pay attention to.
The first one is memory pressure.
How much more memory are you using?
Second one is the speed
of your application.
Is your application just
going to simply become faster?
Marketing might want you to believe that.
But we'll find out the details of that.
You also need to know how much
garbage collection overhead might
change going from 32-bit to 64-bit.
All right,
so let's go into the first one of these.
Memory pressure.
Well--
Pointers are now 64-bit.
They're not 32-bit.
So your application,
every single object reference you have,
every reference you have to a
Java object is now twice as large.
If you've been doing a good
job of writing really good
object-oriented programming,
then you're going to have
a lot of these references.
If you've been to any of the other
64-bit sessions here at WWDC,
a comment actually has been made that
the memory pressure is really not that
significant going from 32-bit to 64-bit.
Because most real-world applications,
their data structures
are not full of pointers.
Well, with Java, that's different,
and we have to make the point here.
In the worst case, an array of objects is
going to be twice as large.
Most typical objects,
that's not going to be the case,
but they are going to be bigger
simply because you're keeping track
of the superclass and any sort of
object that you have in your fields.
It's going to be bigger.
So now that you know that the amount
of Java heap that you're going to
be using is going to be larger,
keep in mind that you should still use
the general rule of trying to use the
smallest Java heap possible anyways.
Measure, increase at the given amount,
but don't just increase it
two times or three times just
because you're moving a 64-bit.
Also,
this is where I want to talk about the
fact that if you're using a large enough
Java heap and you actually are using a
heap larger than your physical memory,
because of the nature of the JVM,
we're actually garbage collecting the
full heap at a given point in time.
And if we actually can't
fit that all into memory,
you're going to be
experiencing a lot of paging,
and it's not a really good idea.
If your computation requires it,
then go ahead, but do try to avoid that.
Especially in the case where if you're
developing on a system with 16 gigs,
sweet, your application runs,
but be aware that your users might
not have that amount of memory,
and you need to handle
that situation accordingly.
Especially in the case where if
you're developing on a system with
16GB suite your application runs,
but be aware that your users might not
have that amount of memory and you need
to handle that situation accordingly.
Especially in the case where if
you're developing on a system with
16GB suite your application runs,
but be aware that your users might not
have that amount of memory and you need
to handle that situation accordingly.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, the third thing you need to
be aware about the change in
performance of your application
is the cost of garbage collection.
If you use a larger Java heap,
it will take longer to collect it.
You will experience longer pause times.
So how can you change your application?
You can't just use less memory.
Well, one of the things that you need to
realize is that with the new Intel Macs,
especially the Mac Pro we
announced on Monday,
we are talking about systems
that now have four cores.
You actually probably do have extra
CPU available to you for doing a
lot of asynchronous computations
for your garbage collection.
And we've been shipping since Java 4
alternative garbage collection
algorithms outside of the default one,
the synchronous mark sweep,
that until now, it might have been
somewhat compelling to use.
But now when you have all these CPUs,
it really, really can actually
make a huge difference.
Specifically, so there's two of them.
There's the parallel garbage collector.
There's the concurrent mark
sweep garbage collector.
And I have the, you can read what the
flags are right there.
One of the things to point out
about the concurrent mark sweep
is that this one actually runs
asynchronously to your application.
So it takes a little
bit of CPU all the time.
And therefore minimizing the actual
latency at the time when your application
is only doing garbage collection.
So this is another way of you can
improve the garbage collection
performance while you're running.
Okay,
so I've talked about a lot of stuff,
but being the cynic that I am,
I really want to actually show
you our 64-bit JVM in action.
I don't have anything too spiffy.
Let's see.
Where are we?
Hmm.
Can we get the demo machine up?
All right, I'll give it a second or two.
Let's see, what can I talk about?
Well, I'm just going to continue with
the slides and then see if I can...
Try... Yeah,
let's just go with the slides then.
Okay, so what was I running that on?
Well, you don't know what I was running.
But what I was running that on
is our just announced Mac Pro.
Well this is exactly the sort
of configuration that we will
be supporting a 64-bit JVM on.
We'll be shipping this
with Mac OS X Leopard.
It'll be running on all of
our 64-bit enabled Intel Macs,
and it will be available
only in Java SC6.
What can you expect to be able to
run in the lab on the Leopard seed
or on your own Mac Pro when you buy
it and install the Leopard seed?
Basically, you should be able to run...
You should be able to run an application
as complicated as GeneSpring.
The graphics stack works, GUI works,
networking works,
just about everything works.
We just barely got this
thing up and running,
but we've been really excited
about how much actually we've
been able to get working,
and we're excited to see what you're
able to get up and running and give
us feedback on what's left to do.
One thing that we do know
is a lot of the tools that
Roger mentioned in the previous part,
JConsole itself does work,
but a lot of the other tools like
JStack and JHeap analysis tool,
those aren't there yet,
but they will be ready by
the time we ship Leopard.
Okay.
And how do you actually turn
on 64-bit in your application?
It really is as transparent
as I was mentioning before.
You need to add one flag,
and one flag only.
It's the minus D64 flag
on the command line.
Once you've done that,
you will just get the same
old default heap size,
but you're actually able
to create larger heaps.
So just change your heap size
with minus XMS or minus XMX,
and that's it.
Well, almost it.
Just like last year,
if you're not a pure Java application,
you do need to do more work.
You actually probably do need to
pay attention to the tips and tricks
mentioned in the other 64-bit sessions.
Oh, there we go.
All right.
Let me go over here.
I just want to actually prove that
we actually had this thing running.
Those of you that haven't
been down to the lab,
you can see here's our 32-bit JVM.
No big deal.
It's an obvious hello world.
It's not that exciting.
But right here, you can actually see
that we're running a JVM.
We're running with a 64-bit JVM.
All right.
Let me up the ante just a tiny, tiny bit.
and actually show you a large heap size.
So what's big enough?
Let's go with...
5000 meg and a maximum heap size of what?
10 gigs.
And sure enough, that works.
Oh.
Oh, yeah, sorry.
That's not completely right.
And as you can see,
and as you're perfectly aware of,
if I had run this without...
That it actually says that it's
an invalid initial heap size.
So sure enough, this works.
No big deal.
I was thinking of showing you something
that would show you the different
GC characteristics of an application.
But the reality is that all the
GC behavior is dependent on what
kind of application you have.
So I don't want to show you
something that contrived.
What I do want to point out is one of the
other messages that I gave you earlier.
That it actually says that it's
an invalid initial heap size.
So sure enough, this works.
No big deal.
I was thinking of showing you something
that would show you the different
GC characteristics of an application.
So here I'm bringing up Java 2 demo.
This is the 32-bit version.
I'm just going to go immediately
to the composite frame.
And I'm going to launch--
JConsole, the same application that
Roger was mentioning before.
And I'm going to go
ahead and connect to...
Java 2 demo.
And then while I'm doing that,
let me get the 64-bit version.
And you'll see that I'm running
with the exact same heap size.
That I was in the 32-bit version.
Okay, so I got that running.
Let me go to composite.
And let me increase the
animation delay on both of these.
So that we create a lot of objects.
Let me get this going.
There it goes.
That's hung.
All right.
So as you can see, there's the second--
Java 2 demo.
So we got the two of them
running side by side.
I got the animation delay up.
This is the amount of memory actually
being used by the 32-bit one.
And over here we have the 64-bit one,
the JConsole for it running.
Let me show you these side by side.
One thing to point out here actually
that is really powerful is the
JConsole is running in 32-bit,
and it's introspecting
a 64-bit application.
You can do this totally
seamlessly on the Mac,
have 32-bit and 64-bit
applications side-by-side,
and have them communicating
with each other.
Just like I said,
the other tools don't work yet,
but we will have them running as well.
Here's my point.
The exact same application,
the exact same code,
the exact same Java heap,
and just by running in the 32-bit,
we're having about a steady state
that's well below 10 gigabytes.
It says in really small right there,
7.3 megs of memory used,
and that's Java memory.
And then over here,
we have well above 10 megs,
around 13 megs being used with
the exact same application.
So watch out if you're trying to deploy
a lot of applications on the same system.
Your memory pressure is going up.
Let me go back to slides.
Okay, well actually that's about it.
I hope you,
I'm really excited to see what kind
of new applications you're going to
be bringing to the Java on Mac OS X.
Do let us know what runs,
what doesn't run.
We'll be at the lab with 64-bit
machines available to you,
so we want to see your
application running.
And thank you very much.
I'll bring up Pratik Solanki now
to talk about a bunch of new tools.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
So I'm going to give you a
very simple example script.
And there's a detrace
session tomorrow at 10:15,
so I highly encourage you to go see that.
But here's a very simple example.
It's sort of like a
simple contrived example.
What if I wanted to find out
what processes were opening
which files on my system?
So I just want to know what files
are being opened on my system
and what process is opening it.
Well, I'd write a very simple script
that looks something like this.
And what is this doing?
So the first line over there,
all that it's telling detrace is,
I'm interested in the open syscall.
Fire this probe when the
open syscall is entered.
And what happens when
the probe gets fired?
Well, you're just going to do a printf,
a simple printf that says,
what's the name of the executable?
Exec name out there is a
built-in detrace variable.
That's the name of the executable.
And what's important in
the second part is arg0.
arg0 is the first argument to open.
And if you look at the man page,
that's nothing but the path to the file.
So that's a simple detrace script.
You run it on your
Mac OS X Leopard system on the
seed that you get right now.
And you'll see output like this.
So I ran it on my system.
And while I was running this script,
I was actually doing a cat
of one of my favorite files,
the java.crash.log file.
I get that a lot.
So I do open that a lot.
So I was doing a cat of that.
And you can see cat's opening
up a bunch of to start up.
And you can see it opened up the
java.crash.log towards the end.
And the last two lines over there
is basically spotlight hard at work.
So that was DTrace.
That was a very simple DTrace,
like a two-slide overview
of what DTrace is.
How is that important to you?
What do you need to worry about?
Why is DTrace important
to you as Java developers?
Well, in Mustang or in Java SE 6,
we have built-in support for DTrace,
which means that the JVM exposes
certain probe points.
It exposes a variety of probe points,
which are kind of divided
into two categories.
In DTrace lingo,
they're called providers.
So what are these probe points,
and what are these providers?
Well,
the first one is the hotspot provider.
And this is an example of some
of the probes it gives you.
It's basically giving you
access to VM-level probes.
You know, all the VM internals, you know,
GC start, GCN, monitor, enter, exit,
class loading, unloading, thread start.
So all these VM-level, low-level things,
it's kind of what the hotspot
provider is giving you access to.
So you can write your DTrace script to,
you know,
for listening to these probe events.
The second one is a very
straightforward one.
It's the Hotspot JNI provider.
It's very simple.
It's just an entry and return probe
point for each and every JNI method.
So for any JNI method,
just put a dash entry and dash return,
and that's your detrace probe point.
So, you know, here's a very simple
example that I wrote up.
And this is basically, you know,
what I'm going to show here is
one of the most frequently asked
questions in the Java world is you
always want to know how much time
the garbage collector is taking.
You know, your app's running slow.
You want to figure out, hey,
is the GC taking too much
time or what's going on?
So here's a very simple DTRA script
that you might write to figure that out.
And let me explain to you what this,
you know, block of code's doing.
The first thing is, you know,
the probe points, the probe entry points.
Hotspot, because it's a hotspot probe.
GC begin, GC end, you know,
straightforward,
the name of the entry points.
The $1 over here, what is the $1?
Well, $1 is nothing but the first
argument to your script.
And you need that because what you
typically pass to the script is the PID,
or the process ID of
your Java application.
So that DTRAs know which
process you're interested in.
So, hotspot $1, colon, colon, colon.
And GC begin.
Why the three colons?
Well, you know, you've got to go to the
DTRA stock to find that out.
What do you do when GC starts?
All you're doing over here,
all I'm doing is just
saving the timestamp.
I'm just saving the timestamp
in a start variable,
and when GC ends,
I'm going to calculate the
total time that it took.
So I'm going to calculate the
current timestamp minus what I saved,
and I'm just converting that
into milliseconds because
timestamp is in nanoseconds.
And then I just print it out.
Very simple script.
I can run it against a Java process.
And just like as Roger talked about,
attach on demand,
where you don't need to start the
Java VM with particular arguments
in order to use JConsole now,
it's the same thing with DTrace.
You really don't need to
start your Java VM with any,
your Java program with
any particular arguments.
You could run the script on
any running Java process and,
well, not any running Java process,
the one that's using Java 6.
But you could run the script
without having to start the
VM with any special arguments.
So what happens when you run
the script on a Leopard system?
Well, let me show you.
If I can get to my demo machine.
All right.
Okay, thank you.
So I'm going to show
you how DTrace works.
I'm taking the Java 2D demo
as an example application.
Consider it your long-time
running server process,
if you will.
So what you need to know is, let's see,
you need the process ID of the,
of your Java app.
In this case, it's 365.
And here I'm going to just run.
I'm just running the exact same
script that I just showed you.
I need to run DTRACE as root,
so enter my secret password.
And there you go.
It just keeps printing as GC happens.
As you move around,
you'll see GC taking 500, 17, 12.
It just keeps printing the
amount of time that GC is taking.
Well, all that's good.
Let me just start off under the script,
and let me tell you what
I'm going to do over here.
So that was a very simple example.
It just printed out the
amount of time that it took.
But really, the power of DTRACE lies
in the D language,
or the D scripting language.
And there's a lot of features to it,
and one of the small features that
I'm going to show you is that it
allows you to kind of print out a
nice little statistical distribution.
So instead of seeing numbers
scrolled by like 500,
12, 16, you may want to know, well,
on average, how much is it taking?
Or what's the statistical distribution?
And that's the distribution
of my GC times.
And DTRACE lets you do that.
And DTRACE, in fact,
from the script that I showed you,
I just made one line change,
and I'm running that script right now.
And when I stop it,
Here's what it's telling you.
It's telling you, well,
most of the garbage collections
are taking somewhere between
8 and 16 milliseconds.
So it's like in the time period
that I had the script running,
13 GCs occurred that just took
less than 16 milliseconds.
But there were a few that took more time.
They took around between
half a second to one second.
So it's a better way of
visualizing your data instead of
just having standard printers.
And DTRACE is very powerful
and flexible in that way.
So that's just my very simple
demo on DTRACE and how it runs
and what you can do with it.
So let's go back to the slides.
I know what my next slide is,
so let me just tell you
what I was going to say.
We have some caveats with DTrace.
It's a new technology.
Obviously, we've just started getting
it to run on Mac OS X.
In fact,
the Leopard Seed that you have right now,
the Java 6 on that Leopard Seed,
it's not DTrace-enabled.
So you can't really run the script
that I showed you on your Leopard Seed.
But we will make it available come
spring 2007 when Leopard ships.
We will make DTrace
support in Java enabled,
and it will be running.
And you would be able to
run all those fun little,
definitely the script that I showed you,
and a lot of other scripts
that you can find on the web.
You should be able to run that.
So the next thing that I wanted to
talk about after D-Trace was X-Ray.
Again, how many people have heard
about X-Ray or know about X-Ray?
Because it's been talked
a lot at this conference.
Yeah.
So, okay, we're back.
Let me just...
You know, told you about the caveats.
It's Java 6 only.
Sorry, it's not available for Java 5.
Okay, so let's move on to X-Ray.
What's X-Ray?
Well, you know, that's X-Ray.
You've heard about it.
You've seen demos in
Ted Goldstein's talk.
And there's actually a session
on X-Ray today at 2 o'clock,
so, you know, go for that.
Check it out.
It's a new tracing profiling tool,
very GarageBand-like, where you can add,
you know,
different kinds of instruments and
see how your app or how the system
behaves with respect to all this,
you know, this data that the instruments
will gather for you.
The 64-bit environment is
a great place to start.
You'll learn about memory consumption,
CPU consumption, file access,
disk access, all these kinds of things
you can trace in X-Ray.
And again, why is that important to
you as Java developers?
Well, in Leopard,
we'll have built-in support for Java.
So in X-Ray,
you would be able to profile and
trace your Java applications.
And you could do thread tracing,
memory tracing,
and it'll be fully supported in Leopard.
Unfortunately, it's not available in your
developer seed right now.
But we will have it
available for Leopard.
So here to give a small demo of
X-Ray and how it works with Java,
here's Lin Salameh.
I just want to show you
a little demonstration of
how X-Ray works with Java.
If you've been to Francois' talk,
you might have seen this before,
but we thought we'd do it again.
All right.
So, let's see.
So,
we're going to start with the first one.
Here's my X-ray application,
and as you can see,
we have all the instruments
down here at the bottom.
I'm going to drag up the
Java thread instrument up here,
and to start profiling,
I'm going to press play.
And as usual, we're going to select the
Java 2D demo and start profiling it.
So the cool thing about X-Ray is that
it allows you to see the results of
your Java profiling at the same time
that you're running your application.
So I could, you know,
here's my Java 2D demo launching up,
and I could play around with it,
you know, change colors a little bit,
and then, you know, stop it.
As you can see,
the results of my profiling,
let me zoom in a little bit,
shows me all the threads that
have been running for a while.
Threads that are green are
threads that are running,
and the yellow colors are
threads that are waiting.
Threads that are blocked
are actually shown in red.
I'm actually interested in
the threads that are blocked,
so let me scrub over to
threads that are blocked.
And let's see right here where
my main thread is blocked.
And I'm going to click the info
button to show me more information.
And as you can see,
I have all the names of the threads of
that time slice and their priorities,
whether they're daemon or not,
and whether they're blocked.
So I don't know if you
can see this very well,
but the main thread is actually
blocked on App Class Loader.
And for more detail,
I can click the Extended
Detail button right here,
and I can see the stack
trace of what's happening.
Other threads are actually running.
And I can also scrub along and see here
my event queue thread is actually--
[Transcript missing]
Okay, back to the slides.
Okay,
so that was how X-Ray works with Java.
So those were the two new tools
that we have for you in Leopard,
you know, great new tools.
I really encourage you to try them
out once you get a hand on them,
and it should make
your life a lot easier.
So let's move on.
Let's move on to performance, you know,
numbers.
I'm going to talk to you about
the performance of the Java 6
VM that you have right now.
We're going to go over, you know,
we're going to go over some of the
improvements that have been made
in Java 6 as compared to J2SE 5.
We're going to, you know,
I'm going to explain to you what I'm
measuring my performance benchmarks on,
you know, what benchmarks I'm measuring.
And then we're going to look
at some graphs that tell us,
you know,
how does Java 6 compare to J2SE 5
in terms of the performance.
So let's move on to the client
and server compilers and,
you know,
how does Java on Mac OS X compare
to Java running on Windows.
So let's look at client performance.
So what has happened in Java 6?
Well, Sun's been busy.
It's been hard at work.
And some of the improvements that
they've made in Java 6 in terms
of the client compiler has made
quite a bit of performance impact,
in fact.
So what they did was they changed
the intermediate representation
for the client compiler.
They now use the
SSA intermediate representation,
which is static single assignment.
That's what SSA stands for.
And it's a very powerful form
of intermediate representation.
In fact, that's what's being used
in the server compiler,
and it's being used in JVC 5 as well.
And it lends itself to
better optimization.
So it's very powerful,
and the client compiler
is now using the SSA IR.
Thanks to that,
they've also added now a new register
allocator in the client compiler.
It's a very simple register allocator.
It's a linear scan,
simple register allocator.
It's certainly not something
as complex as the one that you
find in the server compiler,
but it gets its job done,
and it does bring in a
good bang for the buck,
so to speak.
It does bring in a nice
little performance boost.
Another important improvement
that they've made is that the
client compiler now makes use
of SSE/SSE2 instruction set,
which means that, going back to what
Victor was talking about,
how you may not see a big performance
boost in long double performance
between the 32-bit and the 64-bit world.
This is one of the reasons.
If you're using SSE/SSE2
instruction in the 32-bit world,
you're already getting a lot
of the 64-bit advantages.
You may not see a big boost over
there when you move to 64-bit.
The client compiler is using these
instructions and it's helped it a lot.
The server compiler was always fast.
It was really very fast.
In Java 6,
it's doing more aggressive inlining.
It's generally gotten better.
There's some bug fixes, some tweaks.
It's generally been improved
over the last two years that
Sun's been working on it.
Things are looking better in 1.6.
So what's our system configuration?
What are we using?
I'm using a standard Intel iMac.
It's got some extra RAM,
and you can read everything over here.
The thing to note over there is I'm
using comparable versions on Tiger,
Leopard, and Windows.
And I'm using RDP4,
because that's what you have on Leopard.
What are we measuring?
I'm going to show you graphs
that measure two benchmarks.
One of them is the CIMARC benchmark.
It's a numerical benchmark,
computationally intensive benchmark.
And the second one is a
business logic benchmark,
kind of to give a feel for
what the real-world performance
impact of Java 6 will be like.
So let's dig in.
First slide, we're going to compare
Java 6 versus Java 5,
and we're going to look
at the client compiler.
I'm going to look at
CIMARC composite scores,
so larger is better over here.
The bigger the number,
the better the score, the faster the VM.
This is how it looks.
We've got two bars you see over there,
and obviously, as you can see,
Java 6 is better than Java 5.
And in fact, Java 6 is about 18%
faster than JVM 5 was.
So straight out of the box,
just by switching VMs,
you're going to get a performance
boost on your client compiler.
What about the server compiler?
Well, the server compiler is also faster.
It's not as fast as the client compiler,
but it's also got a modest 4% gain.
It's faster than J2SE 5.
So across the board,
you'll see a nice performance boost
when you move from Java 5 to Java 6.
If you look at our business
logic benchmark to get a sense
for the real-world performance,
the bottom two bars that you see
over there is Java 5 and Java 6
compared on the client compiler.
And again, the client compiler is
about 17% faster in Java 6,
but the server compiler
really shines out here.
In fact,
the server compiler has gotten about
37% faster between Java 5 and Java 6,
as you would expect.
This is like a business logic benchmark,
so it's a long-running app.
Server compiler is definitely
better suited for it,
and it's quite fast.
Now we're going to look at
performance numbers across all the
three different OSes that I can
install right now on my iMac.
I can install Mac OS X Leopard,
Mac OS X Tiger,
and Windows XP using Boot Camp.
So I'm going to show you SIMAC numbers
across all three different OSes,
and how does it look?
Well, it's pretty comparable.
All three OSes perform comparable.
In the past,
we've had questions and reports
that Java on Mac OS X is
slower than Java on Windows.
Well, no more.
You give it the same hardware,
and Java on Mac OS X performs
just as well as Windows.
You shouldn't see any performance
degradations when switching OSes.
This is a client compiler.
Server compiler is the same.
All three OSes are pretty
identical in terms of performance.
64-bit.
Victor just announced the 64-bit VM that
we have right now as part of Java 6.
How does it compare?
I'm going to show you CIMAC again.
These are the bars for
the client compiler,
the 32-bit client compiler.
This is a numerical benchmark,
so you expect the server
compiler to do better.
Sure enough,
the 32-bit server compiler is
better in most of these benchmarks.
What about 64-bit?
How does it compare?
The result's mixed.
Sometimes it's a bit faster,
sometimes not.
I would like to add the caveat, though,
that this is, as Victor said,
we just got this running.
We obviously haven't had any time
for any kind of performance tuning.
This is a beta Java 6,
beta 64-bit support on a beta Leopard OS,
so the final numbers will definitely look
different than what you see over here.
This is just to give you an idea
of how the 64-bit VM performs.
So, in summary,
what have we seen in all these
wonderful little bar charts?
We've seen that, you know,
the performance of Java on
Mac OS X and Windows is at par.
It's not something you
should concern yourself with.
Java 6 is faster than J2SE 5, so,
you know,
I definitely encourage you guys to
kind of go try it out and run your
app and see how well it performs.
The client compiler has
received a significant boost,
so you should see an improvement
straight out of the box.
You know,
the client compiler is the default,
so you should see much
faster performance.
and 64-bit is not really for everyone.
You really need to sit and look
at your app and you need to see
whether you need the extra memory.
You need to run in a 64-bit environment
before jumping and passing the
minus 64 flag to your applications.
So that brings us to
the end of our session.
To quickly go over what
we've talked today,
we've talked about 64-bit
support for Java on Leopard.
There's a wealth of new tools that
you're going to have in Leopard.
You've got all your JMAP, JConsole,
JInfo tools.
You've got DTrace.
You've got X-Ray.
And something we didn't
talk about in this session,
but which Victor and Rick talked
about in the previous session,
you have Shark.
Shark's been available on Tiger.
It's there on Leopard.
You can use it for profiling
and tracing your Java apps.
Use it.
Find your performance bottlenecks.
Improve your applications.
And Java 6, it's available right now.
We announced DP5 on Tuesday.
Go ahead, download it.
Try it out on your Tiger systems.
For Leopard, it's there on your developer
seat that you got this week.
Try it out.
Give us your feedback.
Bugreporter.apple.com.
Mark that site.
File bugs.
Tell us about it.
Tell us any issues,
problems you run into.
and just would like to point out
some related sessions we've got.
Most of the Java team is going
to be in the IT lab on the first
floor today between 3:30 to 5:00.
Find us and give us your feedback,
ask questions.
I'll be there.
We have a feedback forum tomorrow.
It's at 9 o'clock in the morning,
so if you're not hungover
from the beer bash tonight,
stop by, give us your feedback,
tell us what you think.
And I don't think we
have any time for Q&A,
so we're going to be around over here,
so feel free to step forward
and ask any questions.